In the previous lecture we have been talking about the concrete or texture and why is it good to use
decision trees.
The only problem we have to solve is how to decide what modes and what features are important and what's
not.
So for example what should be the root node.
How many branches are there for a given node and so on.
So there are lots of lots of questions we can pose when dealing with decision trees.
And we are going to use information theory and Shannon entropy in order to construct a decision tree.
OK.
So first of all let's talk about the dataset we have.
We have four features in our data set Outlook temperature humidity and wind.
And we have a single target variable.
The last column.
So whether we are going to play golf or not.
And as you can see this data set it doesn't contain any numerical values it contains categorical variables.
So as you can see the outlook can be sunny overcast or rainy.
Temperature can be Haught mild or cold.
Humidity can be high or normal.
So basically we have to deal with categorical varietals and this is why we like decision trees because
they have the tendency to deal with both categorical variables and numerical values as well.
OK.
So we would like to end up with a tree like structure like this the root node is the outlook.
And because there are street types as far as Outlook is concerned as you can see Sunny overcast and
rainy that's why the root node has three branches.
Sunny overcast and rainy then the overcast has a single leaf known.
So if the weather is overcast as you can see we are going to play tennis.
As you can see over of cost and play is yes.
If it's overcast the place.
Yes we have two more overcast values and all of them has the target of a fireball Yes.
So if the outlook is over costed then we are going to play tennis.
So this is the decision tree we are after.
But of course somehow we have to decide what is going to be the root node how many branches do we have
and so warm.
So this is why we have to define the so-called Shannon entropy.
So this is right.
Rhythm is used to build decision trees.
It is a top down greedy search of possible branches and it uses entropy and information gain in order
to build the decision tree.
So we can define this age as Shannon entropy or for discrete random variable X where X can have possible
they'll use X on X to up to x An And there's a probability mass function P X and we can define the Shannon
entropy with the help of this formula.
It is minus the sum from our equals to one up to N P x by time is the logarithm of p x Sabai.
OK so we just have to deal with the probability.
As you can see as far as the given possible values of x are concerned.
So there is a good example on Wikipedia.
By the way.
So if you navigate to Wikipedia and search for entropy as far as information theory is concerned there
is a good example for how to calculate Shenan entropy.
So let's suppose a situation that we are considering heads or tails.
In this case heads and tails had equal probability 1.
Divide by two.
And that's why if we calculate Shenan entropy based on this definition.
So minus the sum of P X times the logarithm of p x we are going to end up something like this.
Our musical's to own up to 2.
Why.
Because there are two outcomes.
Heads or tails.
So that's why we just have to deal with two actions.
And because heads and tails both have equal probability 1 divided by two we just have to calculate one
divide by two times the logarithm of one divided by two and it's going to be 1.
OK so as far as fair coins are concerned the entropy is equal to on if we are dealing with it.
Not fair coins.
The entropy is going to be smaller than 1.
So if we have some of the probability of heads and AQ probability for tails we just have to use the
same formula as you can see.
So the sum of the X Sabai times the logarithm of B Exabyte.
As you can see here we are dealing with probability and probability.
Q Because they are not the same so the probability of heads and tails are not the same it is not equal
to 1 divided by 2.
It is p and q accordingly.
So thats why the total entropy is going to be smaller than 1.
So this is how we are dealing with entropy.
Basically if you want to understand decision trees you dont have to know everything about Shannon entropy
but its good to talk a bit about it because this is exactly what's happening in the background.
OK so for completely home again is data that the entropy is zero and even the data set is equally divided.
So there are the same amount of true values and force values.
Then the entropy is one.
OK so as you can see the value of the entropy is within the range 0 and 1.
And why do we bother.
We check on entropy because a branch with entropy more than 1 needs splitting.
So basically this is how we can define the number of branches.
And the most relevant feature as the root node for the decision tree you just have to deal with Shannon
and drop is OK by the way the root node has the maximum information gain.
So the maximum entropy reduction and the leaf nodes have entropy zero.
So this is how we can decide what's going to be a root node and what's going to be leafnode.
We just have to calculate the given Shannon entropy.
OK so for example we would like to calculate the entropy of playing golf.
So we are able to calculate the entropy for a given feature.
In this case we are after the entropy of the target variable.
Ok so if we calculate the number of nos and the number of usas we can come to the conclusion that we
are playing golf non-New times.
So there are nine.
Yes.
In this column and five nos in this column.
So nine times we play golf and five times we do not play golf.
If we want to calculate Shannon entropy we just have to use the formula we have discussed in the previous
slide.
So we just have to calculate the probability of X Y multiply by the logarithm of the probability of
X Y and if we just have to sum them up.
OK so in this case the Shannon entropy of playing golf is the Shannon entropy of nine and five.
Because playing golf can have two values yes or no.
Yes four nine times and no four five times.
What's the probability of.
Yes.
We just have to divide 9.
Divide by 14 because we have 14 samples in the data set and nine of them are.
Yes.
So what's the probability of.
Yes it is 9 divide by 14 which is 0.60 4.
So we just have to use this equation in order to end up with zero dot 94 so 0 that 64 times logarithm
0.60 for minus.
We have to deal with the other possible.
Well you for playing golf.
OK.
In the data set we have five no values 5 divide by 14.
Why 14 because we have 14 items all together.
So basically it is the probability of you know zero that 36 times the logarithm of 0.30 is 6 and it
is equal to zero the 94.
So this is how we are able to calculate the Shannon entropy of a given feature.
And basically it is the most important step as far as calculating the importance of a given feature.
So this is what we are going to talk about in the next lecture.
Thanks for watching.